#### Cell Morphology Enrichment Analysis
From: Systematic exploration of cell morphological
phenotypes associated with a transcriptomic query
By: Isar Nassiri and Matthew McCall

Cell Morphology Enrichment Analysis, or CMEA, aims to find associations between transcriptomic alterations and changes to cellular morphology. It is also used to predict changes in cell morphology from a transcriptomic query of interest.

The first step is to map the query profile against a reference database, e.g. LINCS. This is done by converting the profiles to Boolean (1 or 0) and using MCC [[202017121626-MCC]] > 0.1 to assign two profiles as "similar". *Direction* in changes in expression focused on rather than *magnitude* to reduce impact of technical variability between samples (Lamb et al, 2006)

The top features associated with alterations in gene expression (the CMEA process) is perfomed using LASSO [[202017121640-LASSO]] to model each cell morphology feature as a function of the 978 landmak genes, with cross-validation [[202018121331-Cross_Validation]] used to select the tuning parameter. This thus identifies the most significant transcriptomic features associated with a cell morphological feature. The outcome of CMEA is a set of genes which are associated with an image-based feature, in a local similarity neighbourhood of the transcriptomic query. The genes have a similar expression pattern, and a shared impact on cell phenotype.

This process is validated using LOOCV [[202018121331-Cross_Validation]], which assesses the ability to predict changes in cell morphological features based on the corresponding transcriptomic alterations. The prediction accuracy is scored using Spearman's rank correlation of the experimental and predicted image-based features. 

Biological interpretation includes the generation of a gene-gene interaction network from the transcriptomic profiles, with edges weighted based on the proportion of cell morphological-specific gene sets that contain both of the genes connected by the edge. Such networks can be mined to find genes which are strongly associated both with each other, and a particular cell morphological feature. Pathway enrichment can also be performed on the gene sets, to understand which pathways are driving the cell morphology changes.

#Permanent #Bioinformatics #JanssenProject #Transcriptomics #CellMorphology #PhD #MoA #ML
